---
title: "Interested in How ASP.NET Web App Boots Up?"
date: 2020-07-07
read_time: true
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - C#
  - ASP.NET
gallery1:
  - image_path: ../assets/images/ASP.NET/Source Code/checkpoint-1.png
    alt: "checkpoint-1"
  - image_path: ../assets/images/ASP.NET/Source Code/checkpoint-2.png
    alt: "checkpoint-2"
gallery2:
  - image_path: ../assets/images/ASP.NET/Source Code/callstack1.png
    alt: "callstack1"
gallery3:
  - image_path: ../assets/images/ASP.NET/Source Code/callstack2.png
    alt: "callstack2"
gallery4:
  - image_path: ../assets/images/ASP.NET/Source Code/console1.png
    alt: "console"
---

Create a new Web App (MVC) project inside your solution. I am using .NET Core 3.1 and Rider. Choose the IDE you feel most comfortable with.

Go to the `Program.cs` and `Startup.cs`. Add a few checkpoints to see how the code get executed.

{% include gallery1 id="gallery" layout="single" class="full" caption="Examples of checkpoints" %}

1. `Main(string[] args)` will be executed at the very beginning because this is the entry point of the program.

2. Then `CreateHostBuilder(string[] args)` will be pushed into call stack executed and return a `IHostBuilder`.

3. Then it will get back to the main method and execute the next chained method, `HostBuilder.Build()`, to build a `Ihost`. There are a list of functions defined inside `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting` are pushed into the stack.

{% include gallery2 id="gallery" class="full" caption="Snapshot of Call Stack" %}

4. Next `ConfigureServices` inside `Startup.cs` is triggered.

5. Get back to the main method and execute the last chained method, `run()`, to run the application. Similarly, a series of methods are pushed into the call stack.

{% include gallery3 id="gallery" class="full" caption="Snapshot of Call Stack" %}

6. `Configure(IApplicationBuilder app, IWebHostEnvironment env)` in `Startup.cs` will be called.

7. After configuring the HTTP request pipeline, `Configure()` method pops out. Then, build request pipeline, fire up `KestrelServer` asynchronously, print log info to the screen and call `WaitForShutdownAsync`.

{% include gallery4 id="gallery" class="full" caption="Console" %}
